Approximately one out of six people worldwide live on a dollar a day.
It's a stastics that remains abstract for many who do not feel its implications on a day-to-day basis.
That's why photograph Renee C. Byer travled to four continents to capture the circumstances of people living in extreme poverty-to give us the names and show us the faces of those it haunts.
She shows us the poor whose lives are dominated by health problems that are treatable with modern medicine, who work hard in hazardous conditions for little pay, and who build homes on borrowed land because, like all human beings, they have to live somewhere.
In her book living on a Dollar a Day, Byer translates a stark stastic into stories that help us more easily connect with the problem of poverty and feel compassion for the people it affects.
Byer is interviewed by Becky Harlan.
Becky: Renee, let's start with Jestina Koko. What is her story.

Renee: She can't walk, so she drags herself about her home. Well, she's actually squatting in someone else's home.
They're allowing her to sleep in this hallway with her child. 
I remember that her only hopes and dreams were first, to get herself a place, a liittle apartment or room that she and her daughter could live in so she wasn't in this trafficky area in this other place, and also that her little girl could go to shcool.
This is a great example of where a child is not able to go to shcool because  she's needed to help her mother.
Her mother doesn't have enough money to put her in shcool. The cycle for her is very grim.
Everything is about getting from today to tomorrow. 
If it wasn't for the goodwill of a neighbor, she would be sleeping outside.

Jestina has strugged with this disability since the age of three.
So she's living and beggining on the sides of the street.
When it's raining she can't drag herself out, so she has to work really hard on days when the weather is nice to make up for that.
She does laundry for other families, she makes cookies to try and sell, you can see how hard working she is.
You see this in almost every country. 
Nobody is lacking the will to work, they just need a little bit of extra help to get out of the poverty cycle.

BECKY: You're known for capturing really intimate, relational moments in your photo essays. Tell me about that.

RENEE: Whether the story is done in the U.S. or abroad, the most important thing is to let it unfold on its own. 
Time and access are the essence of compelling photojournalism. 
I have this innate curiosity that drives me beyond the obvious. 
For me, it's very important to go behind the scenes and into their home to find pieces of daily life that everyone can relate to. 
So people aren't seeing a photo that will pushe them away, but will pull them back into the scene. 
So they're not being overwhelmed by the emotions.
So that they can imagine themselves trying to live this life, and in some way, hopefully, they could help.

For instance, we were at a slum in Delhi, and I see this little boy scavenging in this horrible garbage wasteland.
He's got bare hands, not protective clothing. 
He's wearing flip-flops, I think.
And he's looking for a few rags to sell as material to earn some money for his family.
I'm standing there in insufferable heat, my shoes are literally melting it's so hot, and all I'm thinking about, focusing on,  is how can I tell this story about this little boy?
No one else can smell this terrible smell that I'm smelling, nobody can feel this intense heat, nobody can imagine this wasteland that I'm standing in.
How can I give this juice in a photograph?
That's what's going on in my head.
I'm trying very hard in my head to translate that to someone who has never been there.

Later on, I went inside his family's home.
I had no idea what the inside of any of these places was like, so I was just stunned that it was this one tiny 10' x 10' room with just a bed.
That was their entire living space.
And these boys just started playing on the bed.
It was such a beautiful slice of life. 
It's one of those moments that's so unexpected that you just feel privileged to be witness of.
To me, it was such an interesting dichotomy between this child and his determination to try to find something to help his family survive and then later in the day having him play in this very childlike way on the bed with his brothers, and it was this range of emotion which is so important in this kind of work. 
It shows how the human spirit can transcend ever the worst deprivation.

BECKY:Renee, what effect do you hope your work will have?

RENEE: It's very, very easy to look at these images as if they're not real, but they are real.
This does exist. The biggest challenge is making that connection, so that people understand that there are 18,000 children under the age of five dying every day from causes that are preventable.
I'm serrious. 
How can that be happening in this day and age?
And that's why this book is a call to action. 
I hope in my lifetime that we can make a difference, and eradicate this - that we can have a shared humanity.


