In 2014, a fire completely destroyed Uganda's Royal Kasubi Tombs.
The 700-year-old wood-and-thatch tombs were the ritual burial place of four kings and were an important part of Ugandan history.
It seemed as though this sacred place- a UNESCO world heritage site-might be gone forever.
But all was not lost.

Two years before the fire, CyArk, an organization that collects detailed digital records of cultural heritage sites, had created a "copy" of the site.
By digitally preserving the tombs, there was enough information to rebuild and thereby prserve this historically important site for future generations.

Over the 800 World Heritage sites like the Royal Kasubi Tombs are currently at risk.
Many are deteriorating at a rapid rate. Age, weather, and general wear and tear are factors. Natural disasters such as earthquakes-and frequently occurring man-made destruction-also take their toll.
But digitally scanning technology-like that used by CyArk-is coming to the rescue.

CyArk founder and TED speaker Ben Kacyra was one of the inventors of the scanning technology. 
He was inspired to start CyArk after the Taliban demolished Afghanistan's Bamiyan Buddhas in 2001.
If detailed scans are available, he reasoned, at least there will be some sort of record if disaster strikes.

CyArk has a goal of recoding 500 world heritage sites, and has already completed scans of 40 of them.
These sites include Rosslyn Chapel, the Eastern Qing Tombs, and Mount Rushmore.

Rosslyn Chapel
Rosslyn Chapel, located in Scotland, is one of CyArk's completed projects. Built of stone in the 15th century, this place of worship is famous for its intricate symbolic carvings.
It has faced many threats over its 600-year history. 
It was partially destroyed in 1551, used as a stable in 1650, and more recently, an intruder damaged one of the chapel's pillars with a pickax.
Now that the stones has been scanned, future damage can be repaired.

The Eastern Qing Tombs
The Eastern Qing Tombs are an elaborate royal burial ground in China.
Built in the 17th century, it houses the resting place of five Qing Dynasty emperors and 15 empresses.
CyArk has scanned the elaborate carvings and statues that decorate the tombs as part of a program they call the Scottish Ten,
a project that aims to produce virtual reproductions of ten Qing tombs offer a glimpse into the funeral practices of the era.

Mount Rushmore
Mt.Rushmore, in South Dakota, U.S., is one of CyArk's more challenging projects.
Completed in 1941, sculptors took 14 years to carve the heads of presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln into the side of the mountain. 
In 2010, a CyArk scanned the giant sculpted heads over 16 days. 
Besides dealing with fog, rain, snow, and hail, the team had to climb up to the top of the 5,725-foot(1,745m) rocky mountain in order to take the scans.
They then had to rope their equipment into position to scan hard-to-reach places in the monument like chins and eyesockets.
CyArk continues to scan and record important historic sites. 
A network of 38 international partners is helping in the effort. All data collected is archived and publicly available at cyark.org.
"Our collective memory is in the works of man",Kacyra says.
"This is really not just matter of preserving this site or that site.It's a matter of preserving our human collective memory."

Mapping a monument
CyArk's key tool for saving historic sites is a portable 3-D laser scanner. The scanner moves over an area, such as the wall of a tomb, with a pulsing laser. 
The laser measures points on the surface of the area and makes a high-definition record of them, called a "point cloud."
The laser records points as close together as every half centimeter. A point cloud can include hundreds of millions of pieces of data about an area.
One piece of data is the "intensity return"-the intensity of light reflection from the surface.
Different color can show where there are cracks, or whether newer materials have been incorporated into the structure.
The data points are then joined to in a process called meshing to create a virtual surface.
The mesh is then combined with information from digital photographs to create a realistic 3-D model.

